---
date:
    created: 2024-12-18
categories:
    - Tutorial
tags:
    - dev tools
authors:
    - xy
slug: mkdocs-intro
---

# Technical writing with material for mkdocs

!!! abstract
    [Material for mkdocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) is a documentation framework adopted by
    many popular python libraries e.g. [this](https://docs.pola.rs/), [this](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) and
    [this](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/).
    The plugins and markdown extensions make writing rich technical content delightful e.g. maths, code,
    docstring parsers, and more. The main apeal of the project is that "it's just markdown"
    (with a bit of extended syntax). This tutorial provides a step by step intro to setting up a blog website
    (such as this one!) with this framework.

<!-- more -->

## Credit

[template by material team](https://github.com/mkdocs-material/create-blog/blob/main/mkdocs.yml)

## First steps to follow

1. `pip install mkdocs-material`
1. initialize docs locally with `mkdocs new .`
1. create empty remote repo and push local to remote
1. [github] add CI config file as per [material docs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/publishing-your-site/)
1. [github] set publish branch to `gh-pages`

After these steps, a site is published and CI should start working.
New edits of docs in the main branch would trigger rebuild of the site, i.e. focus on
the writing and let robots build the site automatically.


## Customize the theme

In `mkdocs.yml`, config the theme, then customize it e.g. [add dark/light toggle](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/setup/changing-the-colors/)

## Add blog plugin

Without any setting, the plugin creates a directory structure (`/docs/blog/posts`).

Setting the following should be straightforward

1. blog_toc
1. archive_date_format
1. categories_allowed
1. pagination_per_page

The `post_slugify` setting makes use of python markdown extension package, which is a dependency of `material` and installed with it.

## Add tags plugin

Add `tags` plugin in `mkdocs.yml` and create a file `tags.md` in `docs`.

## Add rss plugin

rss is a third party plugin which requires installation.

It is important that have the site_name, site_description and site_url settings configured.
The RSS plugin makes use of this information to construct the feed, so make sure you have configured them.

- `pip install mkdocs-rss-plugin`
- add rss plugin in  `mkdocs.yml`
- add the required package also in ci: run `pip install mkdocs-rss-plugin`

## Extra

such as social media links in the footer

## Markdown extension: maths

Add markdown extension for writing maths

- add `arithmatex` extension in `mkdocs.yml`
- add `mathjax.js` to extra_javascript (create a js file in `docs/js`, define macros as needed)

One can use `katex` instead per [documentation](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/math/?h=math).

## Markdown extension: code block

Add necessary markdown extension for writing code.

- highlight
- inlinehilite
- snippets
- superfences

## Nav

Rename nav sidebar and/or turn it into tabs.

Add to `features` in `theme`

- navigation.tabs : tabs
- navigation.indexes : index attached to sections (overview page)

Also add `nav` section to be explicit what to include in the sidebar/tabs.

## Author

Add author metadata `docs/blog/.author.yml` and use it in all posts
(by specifying `authors` in the header of posts).

## Metadata of posts

Include metadata in the header of posts:

- date (enough)
- authors
- tags
- categories
- slug (if want to customize)
- readtime
