---
date:
    created: 2025-04-07
draft: true
authors: [xy]
categories: [TIL]
tags: [risk management]
---

# Cheatsheet on financial terminologies

<!-- more -->

## balance sheet

The balance sheet roughly describes the incoming (liabilities) and outcoming (assets) cashflow of a financial institution. Assets are what institutions invest. Liabilities are source of the financing for the investment made. The rest is called equity (assets - liabilities). An institution is solvent if the equity is postive. 

## capital

Equity is sometimes called shareholder's capital. 

Capital is also used in regulatory capital  (set by regulators as minimal requirements for the continuation of the business, ranked by tiers, linked to risk weighted assets) and the economic capital (quantile of the loss distribution, modeled internally by institutions for capital allocation, performance measurement). 

## fixed income

Refers to goverment/corporate/municipal bonds, mortgage based securities, certificate of deposits, short term debt securities ...

## yield

Used to measure the return of the bonds.
Having observed all the variables other than $Y$, solve the eqution:

$$
P = \sum_{t=1}^{n \times k} \left[ \frac{C/k}{(1 + Y/k)^t} \right] + \frac{F}{(1 + Y/k)^{n \times k}}
$$

Here $P$ is the current market price, C the coupon paid $k$ times per year for the remaining $n$ years, $F$ the face value. 

We see that $Y$ is essentially an averaged interest rate for the remaining duration of the bond.


## yield curve

A yield curve is a graph that plots the yields to maturity of bonds that have equal credit quality but different maturity dates, at a specific point in time.

It is is obtained by solving the yield equation above with a collection of inputs $(P_i, n_i, F_i, C_i)$.


## value of a portfolio: 

book value accounting is typically used in credit risk, where the value of a loan is its exposure reduced by expected loss due to default.

fair value accounting (IFRS)

- level 1 mark-to-market: fair value according to quoted prices in active market
- level 2 mark-to-model with observable inputs: use similar products traded in markets / use pricing models 
- level 3 mark-to-model with non-observable inputs.  

risk neutral valuation is a special case of fair value accounting. it amounts to find a martingale measure by model calibration with market data, then used the found martingale to compute the price of a product.   

## mapping risks to value

express the value of a portfolio defined above as a function of risk factors. 

## profit and loss

$\frac{V_{t+1}}{1+r_{t}} - V_t$ where $r_t$ is the interest rate for one period of time at time $t$. 

## risk measure

- notional amount: sum of notional amount which may be weighted by riskiness of asset class
- a functional of the profit and loss. say quantile (VaR), variance, shorfalls. 
- scenario based: typical in stress testing. 

## convex risk measures

those satisfying 

- monotone $\rho( L) \le \rho(L')$ if $L\le L'$
- translation covariant $\rho(L+a) = \rho(L)+a$ where $a$ is any constant (non random).
- convexity $\rho(\lambda L + (1-\lambda)L')\le \lambda \rho(L) + (1-\lambda)\rho(L')$ for $\lambda\in [0,1]$

on a convex cone of probability measures.

Coherent risk measurs are a subset of convex risk measures. They need to be 1-homogenous and subadditive. VaR is not coherent in general, but it can be for some restricted classes of distributions. 



